Anybase / Ampere DuckDB 1.5.6 storage migration

Decision: migrate a separate copy. Keep the original database and the legacy
application/library available for rollback. Do not upgrade production files on
first open and do not replace an active application's database file.

Serialization changes

The legacy fork writes table commit_version at CreateInfo field 110 and column
commit_version at PersistentColumnData field 103. Upstream DuckDB 1.5.6 uses
PersistentColumnData field 103 for VARIANT shredded-column metadata.

New fork writes use field 60000 for table commit_version and field 60001 for
column commit_version. These are 16-bit serialization property IDs, not the
values of the counters themselves. Counter values are preserved unchanged.
Keep the 60000–60999 range dedicated to fork metadata in our own schema policy;
this is not an upstream reservation and must be audited at future upgrades.
65535 is the binary object's terminator and must never be used for metadata.

The new reader retains legacy table field 110 and non-VARIANT column field 103.
The VARIANT reader uses upstream field 103 exclusively for shredded-column data
and reads the fork counter from 60001. New VARIANT and composite-column versions
are also transferred through checkpoints, including replacement ColumnData.
The CreateInfo serialization schema is updated along with its generated code so
regeneration does not remove the fork fields.

Migration procedure

1. Inventory the databases, their schema types, encryption requirements and WAL
   files. Stop all writers. Use the old fork to recover and checkpoint databases
   with pending WAL files before migration. Retain the old application version.

2. Choose a different, unused destination path on the staging filesystem.
   From the 1.5.6 branch checkout, run:

   python3 scripts/anybase_storage_migration.py migrate \
     --source /path/to/legacy.db \
     --destination /path/to/staging/migrated.db \
     --legacy-library /path/to/old/libduckdb.dylib \
     --new-library /path/to/new/libduckdb.dylib \
     --source-is-quiescent

   Supply the actual .dylib/.so/.dll files for the old and new forks. The tested
   new library is build/port-debug/src/libduckdb.dylib in this checkout.

3. The tool copies the source into a temporary candidate on the destination
   filesystem. It inspects the candidate with the legacy library and the new
   reader in separate processes, preserving library isolation. It compares:
     - table schemas, ordered column names/types, and row counts;
     - an order-independent fingerprint of every table's logical values;
     - every table/column commit counter;
     - schema, table, index, view and sequence catalog definitions/state.

4. The candidate is attached with STORAGE_VERSION 'v1.5.0', the upstream 1.5
   storage compatibility level used by v1.5.6. PRAGMA force_checkpoint is enabled
   before FORCE CHECKPOINT so an unchanged database is actually rewritten.
   A plain FORCE CHECKPOINT can otherwise leave an unchanged file untouched.
   Only this candidate is opened with the new writer.

5. Reopen and verify the candidate again. Check that the original's checksum is
   unchanged and that no pending WAL appeared. Publish the destination without
   overwriting any existing file. Preserve destination.migration.json, which
   contains source/destination checksums and the verified catalog/counters.

6. Validate the migrated database in an isolated instance of the new application:
   reads, inserts, updates, deletes, CDC events, merger/upsert behavior and a
   restart/checkpoint. Also validate the application's HLC table/sequence state.
   This tool verifies stored state but does not perform the application's cutover.

7. Switch the application to the migrated path during a maintenance window.
   For rollback, stop writers and switch back to the untouched original and old
   application. Writes made only to the migrated copy require a separate replay
   or reconciliation procedure before rollback; the original is a frozen snapshot.

Current scope and unresolved migration cases

- Native 1.5.6 VARIANT persistence works alongside the new fork metadata fields.
- Legacy VARIANT (including nested VARIANT) is explicitly rejected by the copy
  tool. Its old physical layout needs a separately validated converter; do not
  reinterpret old field 103 as upstream shredded metadata or reset its counter.
- This tool requires an unencrypted, quiescent, checkpointed source. It rejects
  pending WAL/recovery files. Encrypted databases need key handling and additional
  migration fixtures before support is added. Failure leaves the source untouched.
- Logical values are compared as SQL VARCHAR representations. Any representation
  difference causes a conservative migration failure requiring review.
- Validation has been run on macOS ARM64. Other platform builds and deployment
  workflows still need their normal CI validation.

Migration evidence

The supplied SYSDB_0.db was copied to the task's scratch directory. Its production
source was never opened for writing. The legacy and new readers agreed on four
tables, four rows and ten nonzero column counters; all four table counters and
its sequence state survived migration. The source SHA-256 remained:
3c12f56a78bc2ccf0d525f8173e6981e0d7c16320ecde7294151478f7c43dc6d

A generated legacy fixture with 6,000 rows, VARCHAR/BLOB, STRUCT, LIST, fixed ARRAY,
a primary key, a secondary index, a view and a sequence also passed the full
copy/rewrite/reopen comparison, including version values.

Port validation also covers new VARIANT/composite counter persistence across
checkpoints/restarts, merger updates across multiple row groups, CDC old/new
values and deletes in later row groups, and repeated long VARCHAR/BLOB updates
with nulls. The legacy Anybase string-memory patch is restored: statistics no
longer allocate string copies, and only effective updates copy strings to the
update heap. Upstream 1.5.6 null-statistics tracking is retained. A regression
checks that repeated no-op VARCHAR/BLOB updates, including nulls, do not grow
the update heap.
